% AmigaFAQ.texinfo   © Ignaz Kellerer
% -*-texinfo-*-
\input amigatexinfo
\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename AmigaFAQ.guide
@settitle Amiga-FAQ
@setchapternewpage off

@iftex
@parskip=0.75em
@end iftex
@c %**end of header


@titlepage

@title{Amiga-FAQ}
@subtitle{Frequently asked questions and answers}
@subtitle{}
@subtitle{@today{}}
@author Ignaz Kellerer
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@tex
@halign{@hfil#&#@hfil@cr
Copyright @copyright{} & Ignaz Kellerer@cr
           & Georg-Habel-Str. 11@cr
          81241 & Munich (Germany)@cr
           & Tel. (+49) 089 / 885147@cr
           & Internet: kellerer@@informatik.tu-muenchen.de@cr
}
@end tex
This document lists some frequently asked questions and tries to give answers.
Its intention is to help new users and to reduce the amount of news that most
experienced users don't like to read anymore.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim and modified copies of
this document following the terms of the ``GNU General Public License''
provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are preserved on all
copies.

The author gives @strong{absolutely no} warranty that the answers given
here are correct. Many of them were contributed by other users and I
cannot even make marginal checks. If you think that something should be
changed, please tell me. Suggestions, contributions, new answers, critics,
flames (oh, how I like this @file{nil:} :-) are rather welcome.

Please notice that there are many questions that aren't answered yet,
even more: Whole sections that remain empty! I feel that I cannot give
satisfying answers. So it's your turn: Fill the gaps and tell me what i
should include into this document!
@end titlepage
@iftex
@headings double
@end iftex

@ifinfo
@node Top
@top Amiga-FAQ

This document lists some frequently asked questions and tries to give answers.
Its intention is to help new users and to reduce the amount of news that most
experienced users don't like to read anymore.


Please notice that there are many questions that aren't answered yet,
even more: Whole sections that remain empty! I feel that I cannot give
satisfying answers. So it's your turn: Fill the gaps and tell me what i
should include into this document!


@menu
* Disclaimer:: Copyrights, (NO) warranty

* Hardware:: CPU, Custom chips, RAM and other stuff
* Operating System:: Kickstart and Workbench
* Graphics:: Monitors, Display modes, @dots{}
* Programming:: Compilers, Includes, Developers, @dots{}
* Applications:: Editors, Word Processors, DTP, Databases, @dots{}
* Networking:: AmiTCP, Mailboxes, Internet, @dots{}
* Emulators:: Unix, X11, MS-Dos, @dots{}
* Miscellaneous:: Life, the universe and everything ;-)
* Sources:: Where and how do I get software and other informations?

* Amiga-FAQ Archive:: Some other stuff
* Contributions:: The Amiga-FAQ needs @strong{YOU}!
* Credits:: What I finally want to say.

* Index:: Where you find what you are never looking for 8-)
@end menu

@node Disclaimer
@unnumbered Disclaimer
This document is

@example
Copyright @copyright{}  Ignaz Kellerer
                Georg-Habel-Str. 11
          81241 Munich (Germany)
                Tel. (+49) 089 / 885147
                Internet: kellerer@@informatik.tu-muenchen.de
@end example

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim and modified copies of
this document following the terms of the ``GNU General Public License''
provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are preserved on all
copies.

The author gives @strong{absolutely no} warranty that the answers given
here are correct or usable. Many of them were contributed by other users
and I cannot even make marginal checks. If you think that something should
be changed, please tell me. Suggestions, contributions, new answers, critics,
flames (oh, how I like this @file{nil:} :-) are rather welcome.
@xref{Contributions}.
@end ifinfo



@include hardware-e.texinfo
@include os-e.texinfo
@include graphics-e.texinfo

@include programming-e.texinfo

@include applications-e.texinfo
@include networking-e.texinfo
@include emulators-e.texinfo

@include misc-e.texinfo
@include sources-e.texinfo



@node Amiga-FAQ Archive
@unnumbered The Amiga-FAQ archive
@cindex Amiga-FAQ archive
@cindex history
The Amiga-FAQ is available in different formats: Ascii format (which is
posted to the nets) AmigaGuide format (which is the adequate format on
the Amiga) and in dvi format (to be printed). Additionally there is some
stuff, that might be useful or interesting, but could not be included
into the Amiga-FAQ:
@example
txt/amiga.history       On the Amiga's history
txt/story.txt           The Commodore story (or: the Tramiel
                        story ;-)
txt/amiga.newsgroups    Overview on comp.sys.amiga.*
txt/amiga.sites         List of FTP sites
txt/AmigaOverview.tex   A short overview on the Amiga-Soft- and
                        Hardware
txt/Hardware.tips       For those people who can't live without solder
src/JWSplit.c           The source of a file splitter
src/JWJoin.c            The opponent to JWSplit
src/addtoc.c            Utility to add a toc to texinfo-created docs
                        (this document uses it)
programmers/*           Some stuff for programmers: pragmas, vararg
                        versions of some tag functions and some
                        amiga.lib functions (HookEntry, DoMethod)
@end example

I decided to collect these in the Amiga-FAQ archive. It is called
AmigaFAQ.lha and can be found on Aminet, directory @file{docs/misc}.


@node Contributions
@unnumbered Contributions
@cindex Contributions
This FAQ can neither get useful nor hit further development without your
help. Suggestions, contributions, new answers, critics, anything is rather
welcome.

Please note, that very major subjects are absolutely missing yet: Nothing
about sound, nothing on graphic cards, no Animation. These are some of the
Amiga's best points! But I don't know them @dots{} :-(

So grab your keyboard (Your pencil? Well, if there's no other way@dots{})
and send mail to:

@example
      Ignaz Kellerer
      Georg-Habel-Str. 11
81241 Munich (Germany)
      Tel. (+49) 089 / 885147

      Internet: kellerer@@informatik.tu-muenchen.de
@end example


@node Credits
@unnumbered Credits
@cindex Credits
My thanks go to:
@table @strong
@item Reinhard Spisser and Sebastiano Vigna
for the Amiga version of texinfo. This is written with it.

@item The Free Software Foundation
for the original version of texinfo and many other excellent programs.

@item Dylan McNamee
for contributing the sections on Editors, Word Processors, DTP and Postscript
and some wording fixes.

@item Joseph Luk
for help in the section on chunky/planar, double buffering and PAL/NTSC

@item Urban Dominik Mueller
for the FAQ on FTP and Mail-servers.

@item Lars Hecking (lhecking@@nmrc.ucc.ie)
@itemx Philippe Brand (phb@@colombo.telesys-innov.fr)
for the complete gcc part

@item Jochen Wiedmann (zrawi01@@decap2.zdv.uni-tuebingen.de)
for the composition and posting of the Amiga FAQ until July 1994.
@end table

@page
@headings off
@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@contents

@bye

