@node Non-Latin texts
@section How to deal with Non-Latin texts?
Currently I know only programs for read japanese and
chinese texts.

@menu
* Japanese:: Japanese editors and viewers
* Chinese:: Chinese viewers
@end menu

Siepieau Pang (siepiau@@gbamail.mincom.oz.au)

@node Japanese
@subsection Japanese editors and viewers
@cindex Kanji
@cindex ANS
@cindex JemTeX
@cindex JIStoJi
@cindex jmore
ANS (Amiga Nihongo System) version 1.0, produced by
@example
    SoftHouse Tecnode
    102 Coupo Izumi
    1-4-5 Houya-shi
    Izumi-machi
    Tokyo 202
    JAPAN
@end example
@noindent
and distributed in Japan by MIQ Japan, Ltd. has been released
in Japan. It offers a Japanese environment for Commodore Amiga
users, is compatible with Amiga DOS 2.0 (works fine with version
1.3, too), and requires at least 1MB RAM (more recommended). ANS
features Japanese windows/menus (these replace the English menus),
12 and 24 dot-matrix Japanese fonts, Jinput/Joutput (both constitute
a Japanese front-end processor), XEDmini (a simple Japanese text
editor with built-in font editor, and can be used as a Japanese
terminal), a kana-to-kanji conversion dictionary for XEDmini and
Jinput, Jfilter (for viewing Japanese files while connected to an
MS-DOS console), and utilities for Japanese code conversion and
communication. Note that XEDmini uses pcj (Japanese version of
pcd) for communications, and that one can do binary
uploads/downloads while working on files). I hear that it is
reasonably priced, and very easy to use.

JemTeX is a preprocessor that turns a Japanese text file (i.e.,
a TeX file with Japanese text) into a standard (La/Mu)TeX file.
The archive (zipped) comes with the jis2mf utility along with a
24-dot bitmapped kanji font and a program for generating kanji
tables. With jis2mf you can make metafont files out of the
bitmapped font. JemTeX v2.0 will compile on an Amiga using
SAS/C, or on a UNIX machine using gcc. This program is available
at the FTP site utsun.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp (133.11.11.11). JemTeX v2.0
was written by Francois Jalbert (jalbert@@iro.umontreal.ca or
jalbert@@cs.ubc.ca).

The following are PD viewers on Aminet (text/show directory)

JIStoJi by Bart Mathias automatically identifies
electronic texts written in Old-JIS, New-JIS, Shift-JIS, or EUC-JIS
(as well as ASCII) and displays them on screen, or prints them to
dot-matrix printers. Will run on Kickstart 1.3 and up.

jmore (Japanese more) is basically a more clone that also reads
ns-kanji (Shift-JIS) text. It opens its own hires interlaced screen
and requires a font handler called jFontSys to be running. The
archive includes jmore, jFontsys and the wlook/16 bitmap font.
However, you will also need the kanji fonts. (Aminet,
@file{text/font/amknj16.lzh}) All the documentation comes as Japanese
text, so you need a JIS viewer to read the installation
instructions. For your convenience, I have summarized the
installation procedure below:
@enumerate
@item Place the @code{wlook/16} font in your @file{FONTS:}
directory
@item Assign @file{JFONTS:} to where you unarchive the
amknj16 fonts. This need not be the same as your @file{FONTS:}
directory
@item Place the file @file{jFont-startup} in the @file{S:}
directory
@item Insert the following line into your @file{startup-sequence}:
@example
    run >nil: jFontSys
@end example
@noindent
@item To use execute the following command
@example
    jmore <japanese.txt>
@end example
@end enumerate
@noindent

JISconvert by Dwight Hubbard is a japanese text conversion utility
for Amiga computers. It supports conversion between EUC, New JIS,
Old JIS, NEC JIS and Shift JIS. It also has options to convert
half-size katakana to full size and repair files with ESC
characters stripped. No installation required. Requires
AmigaDOS 2.04 or newer.


@node Chinese
@subsection Chinese text viewers
@cindex Guo Biao
@cindex HZview
HZview (by Ji Ma) shows 8-bit Guo Biao encoded chinese text
documents. Requires AmigaDOS v2.1 and above, and cclib.16
bitmap library (included).

@strong{NOTE}: This is a pre-release version. What the doc
file does not tell you is that you need to do the following:
@enumerate
@item Open a default public hires interlaced 1 or 2-bit deep
screen
@item The size of the file to be read is restricted to about 30K
(on my machine, A1200, WB3.0)
@item An FPU is required if you want to scroll the text without
crashing
@item The cclib.16 should be in the same directory as the file
to be read
@end enumerate
@noindent
Other small bugs still exist which may crash the machine.

