@node Fonts

@section Font Concepts

  The Amiga is able to use two different concepts of fonts. First of all
  there are the bitmap fonts. These fonts are created by drawing a letter
  pixel for pixel onto the screen. The advantage is that they look good at
  small sizes, but are not very good for printout. Also they don't look
  very good when you change their size. Therefore you have to recreate the
  font for each size. Second there are the vector fonts. They are created by
  curves which are stored as mathematical formula. This has the advantage
  that changing the sizes does not effect the output. But this only applies
  for larger sizes and print-outs. Vector fonts also use less memory.

@menu
* Font Formats:: What font formats are common on the Amiga?
* Font Sources:: Where to get them?
* Commercial Fonts:: Who earns his money with them?
* Non-Latin Fonts:: Non-Latin Fonts on the Amiga
* Installing Fonts:: How to install the fonts
* Font-Utils:: Which tools are used to make fonts?
* Generating Fonts:: How do I make new fonts?
* Font-Probs:: What to do when specific problems appear
@end menu

@node Font Formats
@subsection Amiga Font Formats

@enumerate

@item Agfa IntelliFont (suffix: .type or .lib) is the native font format on
  the Amiga. You can use it in any application and it can be converted to the
  standard bitmap format using the system utilities @file{IntelliFont}
  (OS 3.x) or @file{Fountain} (OS 2.x).

@item Postscript Type 1 fonts can be used within many applications, it can be
  used in every word processor and DTP program. There are two versions of
  the Type 1 format: Binary and ASCII (suffix: .pfb & .pfa). The Amiga
  software uses the Binary format, but you can easily convert them with
  TypeSmith or some PD software products (z.B. PFB2PFA) . In Addition to the
  files mentioned  above, there are the metrics files with the suffixes .afm
  or .pfm. They contain information about the size (width) of the letters
  and most programs expect this file to be in the same directory as the font
  file.

@item Postscript Type 3 fonts (suffix: .ps or nothing) are not often used on
  the Amiga, but some applications do support this font format (e.g.
  PageStream). There are also some download utilities from PD sources
  available.

@item Truetype fonts (suffix: .ttf) are not very common on the Amiga, there
  is one word processor supporting this format (Wordworth 3.0). Due to the
  lower quality of the format, Amiga users tend to use higher quality for
  their DTP, DTV and word processing... There are also two formats: Mac &
  Windows available. The Amiga software is able to use the Windows format.

@item DMF fonts is the privat format of PageStream (suffix: .dmf), since
  PageStream is the market leader in DTP programs on the Amiga, so this
  format is very common!

@item Bitmap fonts (suffix: .font and numbers in a directory by the name of
  the font, sometimes .otag when converted from IntelliFont) were used in the
  OS 1.x, but have been replaced by the  superior IntelliFont Format in OS
  2.0. Under 2.0 or higher you still are able to use the bitmap fonts for
  small sizes, but for printouts you should use the IntelliFont format or
  any other vector font format mentioned above.

@item Colour Bitmap fonts (same suffixes as Bitmap Fonts, but the numbers have
  in addition a C, e.g. 35C) are also very common on the Amiga, they are
  mainly used for DTV applications, like the Video Toaster and Scala.

@end enumerate


@node Font Sources
@subsection Frequently Requested Amiga Fonts

@enumerate
@item First place to look for fonts is the AMINET archive. This is the biggest
    archive of Amiga software and there you will find also quite a lot of
    fonts. The Aminet consists of many mirrors around the world. Here are some
    of them:

    @enumerate
    @item ftp.wustl.edu,
    @item ftp.luth.se,
    @item ftp.eunet.ch,
    @item ftp.uni-paderborn.de,
    @item ftp.doc.ic.ac.uk.
    @end enumerate

    Just log in as ftp and go to the directory

    /pub/aminet/text/font.


@item Another good ftp server to look is the CICA-server:

    @enumerate

    @item ftp.cica.indiana.edu

    @end enumerate

    To this server are also some mirrors around the world available.


@item Also a good place to look for is the following WWW server:

    @enumerate

    @item http://jasper.ora.com/Internet-Font-Archive.html

    @end enumerate


@item Another good place is the Fresh Fonts I CD-ROM, there you will almost
    certainly find some nice fonts. The CD is available from

    @enumerate

    @item Fred Fish / Amiga Library Services (orders@@amigalib.com)
    @item Stefan Ossowski / Schatztruhe GmbH

    @end enumerate

    The CD is for free when buying another CD from that company.

    You can also access the HTML pages on the CD under the following address:

    @enumerate

    @item http://macke.gris.informatik.uni-tuebingen.de:4711/~damor/

    @end enumerate

@end enumerate


@node Commercial Fonts
@subsection Commercial Font Sources

  Commercial fonts can be obtained from a number of different companies,
  including the large font houses: Adobe, Font Haus, Font Company,
  Bitstream, and Monotype. At these companies, fonts cost about $40 for a
  single face, and must be purchased in packages. Adobe, Bitstream, and
  Monotype also sell pre-designated type collections for slightly lower
  prices.

  There are also a lot of PD reseller who have a vast quantity of fonts,
  check out your local Amiga magazin for more information.

  Please consult the vendor list for a more complete list of vendors.


@node Non-Latin Fonts
@subsection Non-Latin fonts on the Amiga

  Due to the really bad information policy by C= there was actually no
  information about non-latin fonts. But still it is possible to use them,
  without difficulty. You just have to get yourself some additional files.
  First of all you need the non-latin font files. There is a large selection
  of them on the Fresh Fonts CD-ROM mentioned above. In order to use the
  non-latin font files, you have to get yourself the appropriate keymap
  file, this will remap the keys on the keyboard to the appropriate letters
  of the foreign alphabet, e.g. in order to use a Russian font, you should
  set the russian keymap file in the preferences (via PREFS/INPUT).

  Not only that you can write with a non-latin alphabet, you can also localize
  your workbench. How about a Greek workbench or a Hebrew workbench? Have a
  look into the AMINET archive (mentioned above) for these files!

  In addition to this you can easily use Hebrew & Arabic in any word processor
  incl. writing from right-to-left! This can be easily done by setting the
  kerning value to negative values (like this the cursor moves left and not
  right) and moving the characters into the negativ part! You can get fonts
  from me with this feature!


@node Installing Fonts
@subsection Amiga Font Installation

  The installation of Postscript, DMF and Truetype fonts is described by the
  application that use them. Please refer to the manuals of the software
  packages.

  The installation of IntelliFonts is very easy. Just start @file{IntelliFont}
  (OS 3.x) or @file{Fountain} (OS 2.x) and follow the guidelines from within
  the program.

  In order to install bitmap fonts, either copy them to the logical device
  FONTS: or assign the directory with your bitmap fonts:

  @example
  ASSIGN Fonts: <your_directory> ADD
  @end example

  Right after this you can start your application and use them. When using
  non-latin fonts, don't forget to set the appropriate keymap file!


@node Font-Utils
@subsection Amiga Font Utilities


@enumerate
@item IntelliFont

  IntelliFont is the system program by OS 3.x which lets you install Agfa
  IntelliFonts and converts them to bitmap fonts. The program is located in
  the drawer @file{SYS:System/}. For more information read your Workbench 3.x
  manual.

@item Fountain

  Is the preceding program to IntelliFont and comes with the now obsolete
  OS 2.x. Please read the section about Fountain in your Workbench 2.x
  manual.

@item PFB2PFA

  This neat little utility lets you convert Postscript Binary files to
  Postscript ASCII files. This is needed in order to use DOS & Amiga
  Adobe Type 1 fonts on the Mac!

@item CacheFont

  This great program caches the fontlist for you, in order to save a huge
  amount of time. The program looks for all fonts available on the system
  and creates a special cache-file on disk.

@item TypeSmith

  This is the best font converter on the Amiga, besides this function it is
  also a full blown font editor (see below) :-). The program is able to
  convert between:

  @enumerate
  @item Truetype
  @item DMF
  @item Adobe (Type 1 & 3)
  @item IntelliFont
  @item Bitmap (Amiga, Adobe, DMF)
  @end enumerate
@end enumerate

@node Generating Fonts
@subsection Making Outline Fonts

  This is very, very difficult. Many people imagine that there are
  programs that will simply convert pictures into fonts for them. This is
  not the case; most fonts are painstakingly created by drawing curves
  that closely approximate the letterforms. In addition, special rules
  (which improve hinting, etc.) mandate that these curves be drawn in
  specific ways. Even designing, or merely digitizing, a simple font can
  take hundreds of hours.

  The easiest way of learning how to create fonts, is to have a look at
  existing fonts and try to change some letters.

  Given that, there are two major programs used for font design on the
  Amiga, TypeSmith 2.5 ($150) and FontDesigner ($100). These programs
  will allow you to import scanned images, and then trace them with
  drawing tools.  The programs will then generate Adobe type 1, 3, TrueType,
  AGFA Intellifont, DMF and Bitmap fonts for either the Amiga, the Macintosh
  or the IBM PC. They will also generate automatic hinting. They also open
  previously constructed outline fonts, allowing them to be modified, or
  converted into another format.

  As far as I know, there are no shareware programs that allows you to
  generate outline fonts.

  There are also two programs for creating bitmap fonts. Personal Fonts
  Maker and Calligrapher. The second one has not been updated for several
  years, but it still is a good tool to work with. The first Program was
  created by adding some features to a good bitmap paint program (Personal
  Paint).

  There are some shareware tools to create bitmap fonts which you can
  convert to outline (vector) fonts with TypeSmith.


@node Font-Probs
@subsection Problems and Possible Solutions

@enumerate
@item Pagestream does not recognize your newly installed font.

  This happens when you have two fonts with the same ID. The solution is
  to load such a font into a font editor and enter a new ID for one of the
  fonts. Still it might happen that you choose another one, that has already
  been used by!


@item Your application does not find the IntelliFont.

  This happens when you haven't set the locigal device FONTS: to your drawer.
  You can change this by typing the following command into your SHELL or add
  this line to your @file{S:User-Startup} file:

@example
  ASSIGN Fonts: <your_drawer> ADD
@end example

@item You're using a non-latin font and the wrong characters appear when
  typing.

  This happens when you forget to set the appropriate keymap file. Enter
  the Prefs directory and start the program @file{INPUT}. There you can
  choose your keymap file.

@end enumerate


