@node Emulators
@chapter Emulators
@cindex Emulators
What? The Amiga isn't good enough? You really want it to be another machine?
Well, look here@dots{}

@menu
* Unix:: Can I run Unix on my Amiga?
* X11:: Is it possible to use the Amiga as X11 terminal?
* IBM-compatibles:: What to do if I really have to start a MS-Dos program?
* MsDos-Syquest:: How do I use MsDos-formatted Syquests?
@end menu


@node Unix
@section Can I run Unix on my Amiga?
@cindex Unix
@cindex NetBSD
@cindex Linux
Actually there are three Unix versions on the Amiga. All of them need at
least 68030 (@pxref{68EC0xx,MMU,MMU}), probably a 68040 in the near future
and seem to have problems
with many hard-drive-controllers. You should have a good look into the
documentation before installing it. Unix needs much resources, say at least
10Mb RAM and a 150Mb Unix-partition on the hard-drive.

@enumerate
@item Commodore offered a System V Unix in the past. It contained TCP/IP,
X11 and other software and seemed to make a good job, but it was expensive
and after all Commodore has dropped developing it. Commodore-Unix needs a
streamer because it is distributed on tapes.

@item A Linux port is prepared. But actually there is not very much than the
kernel. Specialists might like to use it, but it cannot be recommended for
now. Linux is freely distributable. Sources: @code{ftp.tsx-11.mit.edu} or
@code{ftp.uni-erlangen.de}, both directory @file{/pub/Linux/MIRROR.tsx-11/680x0}.
Or @code{ftp.leo.org}, directory @file{/pub/comp/os/linux/680x0}.

@item NetBSD is freely distributable too. Like Linux it isn't ready for now,
but it seems to make big steps. Most GNU software is said to run, especially
emacs and gcc. I think it's worth to have a look on it. Sources:
@code{ftp.uni-erlangen.de}, Directory @file{/pub/amiga/unix/NetBSD-regensburg}.
@xref{Fish CD}.

@end enumerate


@node X11
@section Is it possible to use the Amiga as X11 terminal?
@cindex X11
@cindex GfxBase
@cindex DaggeX
Yes, it is. There are three different packages available:

GfxBase offers a commercial version which is said to be excellent, but
expensive. The distribution includes different window managers and clients.
A demo version is on Aminet. (@file{gfx/x11/GfxBase-X11-Demo.lha})

AmiWin is a Shareware X11R6 product supporting AmiTCP, AS225 and different
graphic cards. A demo version is available on Aminet,
@file{gfx/x11/AmiWin*.lha}.

DaggeX is freely distributable and probably not finished yet. (It calls
itself version 0.91.) Source: Aminet, @file{gfx/x11/DaggeX-0.91.lha} and
@file{gfx/x11/twm_930531.lha}.


@node IBM-compatibles
@section Is there a way to start MS-Dos programs?
@cindex IBM emulator
@cindex MS-Dos (emulator)
PC-Task is a software only IBM-PC emulator for all Amiga computers allowing
use of MSDOS and MS Windows 3.1 software (provided RAM/HD space is
sufficient).  The current release is 3.1 which includes emulation of 80286 with
MDA/CGA/EGA/VGA/SVGA, serial and parallel ports, mouse, two harddrives,
two floppies and CDROM support.  A demonstration version can be obtained from
aminet sites: @file{/pub/aminet/misc/emu/PCTaskDemo31.lzh}.
Author Chris Hames (bytey@@werple.mira.net.au)
Publisher (pctask@@quasar.dialix.oz.au)


@node MsDos-Syquest
@section How to mount MsDos-formatted Syquests on Amiga
@cindex Syquest
@cindex MS-Dos (Syquest)
To mount a MSDos-formatted Syquest on Amiga, you need with an (DOSen)
Adaptec-Controller the following Mount-entry in @file{DEVS:Mountlist}:
If your medium does have more than one partition, you need to
copy the following Mount-Entry for every partition and give each partition
another name (eg. SyC:, SyD:, SyE:, etc.)
You don't need to change LowCyl and HighCyl for each partition;
CrossDOSFileSystem does that automatically.

@example
SyC:   /* SyD:, SyE:, etc. */
        Filesystem      = L:CrossDOSFileSystem
        Device          = scsi.device
        Unit            = 2
        Flags           = 1
        Surfaces        = 1
        BlocksPerTrack  = 1
        BlockSize       = 512
        Reserved        = 1
        Interleave      = 0
        LowCyl          = 0
        HighCyl         = 524287
        Buffers         = 128
        BufMemType      = 0
        Stacksize       = 4000
        Priority        = 5
        GlobVec         = -1
        DosType         = 0x4D534800
        Activate        = 1
#
@end example

For different (DOSen) controllers this entry should work, too, but maybe
you have to adjust it. When inserted, the Syquest-270MB medium is (in this case)
automatically mounted (as drive SyC:) and can be used with help of the
CrossDOS-Filesystem as usual.

Gerhard Schneider (fido@@incubus.sub.org)
Andre Keller (keller@@rs11.hrz.th-darmstadt.de)


