@node Miscellaneous
@chapter Miscellaneous
This last chapter contains some questions that don't fit in the chapters
above.

@menu
* Unix-LhA:: Is there any unix version of LhA?
* Endings:: What are files ending with ...?
* HD-Compression:: Is there a Stacker-like Utility to pack my hard drive?
* Fish disk xxx:: Where do I get Fish disk xxx?
@end menu


@node Unix-LhA
@section Is there any unix version of LhA?
@cindex Unix-LhA
@xref{Endings}.


@node Endings
@section What are files ending with ...?
@cindex packers
@cindex packers on Unix
@cindex file endings
@cindex endings
@cindex .lzh
@cindex .arj
@cindex .zoo
@cindex .lha
@cindex .zip
@cindex .dms
@cindex .zom
@cindex .Z
@cindex .z
@cindex .gz
@cindex .tar
@cindex .sfx
Most endings on FTP sites or Fish disks tell you that the file is compressed
and/or is an archive containing more than one file. Some programs even
archive whole disks. Frequently found endings and programs to handle the
related files are:
@table @strong
@item .sfx
Compressed archives which are included in an executable program: Just call
the program and it will extract itself (sfx = self extract)
@item .lha
@itemx .lzh
Compressed archives; recommended: LhA (@file{util/arc/LhA_e138.run} on Aminet
 or Fish disk 715) or Lx (@file{util/arc/lx100.lha} on Aminet), Unix version
available (@file{misc/unix/lha-1.00.tar.Z})
@item .dms
Disks compressed using DMS (@file{util/arc/dms111.sfx} on Aminet or
Fish disk 406)
@item .zom
Disks compressed using Zoom (@file{util/arc/Zoom_5.4.lha} on Aminet, Fish
disk 682); an older version which you probably need for uncompressing
PasTeX is found on Fish disk 459.
@item .zoo
Compressed archive; recommended: Zoo (@file{util/arc/zpp2-10.lzh} on Aminet
or Fish disk 527)
@item .Z
@item .z
@item .gz
Compressed files; recommended gzip (@file{util/pack/gzip124x.lha} on
Aminet), note that this are Unix files in most cases
@item .tar
Acrhive; recommended: tar (@file{util/arc/tar.lha} or
@file{util/arc/gtar10.lha} on Aminet or Fish disk 445), note that tar is
a Unix archiver and you often find soething like @code{.tar.Z}.
@item .arj
Compressed archive; recommended unarj (@file{util/arc/unarj-0.5.lha} on
Aminet)
@item .zip
Compressed archive; recommended UnZip (@file{util/arc/unzip-5.1.lha} on
Aminet), note that this are MS-Dos archives in most cases
@end table


@node HD-Compression
@section Is there a Stacker-like utility to pack my hard drive?
@cindex Stacker
@cindex XFH
@cindex XPK
@cindex HD compression
XFH does a good job. It operates as a handler and uses the XPK-libraries,
so you have different compression modes (RAKE is a good choice) and possibly
even more in the future. The only disadvantage is, that the size of a file
is limited by RAM: Don't use it with less than 2MB of RAM.

XPKDisk by Olaf 'Rhialto' Seibert is another stacker program that takes
advantage of the variety of XPK libraries available. Unlike other harddisk
compressors it does not compress the files, but creates a pseudo partition
and stores the whole tracks as compressed files on your harddisk. Its major
advantage is that it does not limit the maximum file size, because it works
similar to trackdisk.device and therefore does not need too much temporary
storage.

But be careful if you want to use ReOrg on a comprimized partition:
ReOrg should be set to leave enough memory for the xpkdisk buffers.
And because of ReOrgs buffering, you can use few buffers for xpkdisk
(perhaps as few as 2 or 3). Don't use ReOrg if you don't know the
memory needs of XFH or XPKDisk.

Another possibility is EPU. It's shareware and should offer the same as XFH,
but without limiting the file size.

Sources: Aminet, directory @file{util/pack}, Fish disks 754 (XFH) and
858 (EPU)


@node Fish disk xxx
@section Where do I get Fish disk xxx?
@cindex Fish disks
Those FTP servers have that much space (or a CD-Rom) to have all fish disks
available online:
@example
ftp.isca.uiowa.edu      (USA, directory @file{/amiga/fx/fxxx})
ftp.hawaii.edu          (USA, directory @file{/pub/amiga/fish})
ftp.funet.fi            (Finland, directory @file{/pub/amiga/fish})
@end example
@noindent
Note that the CD-Rom's are not always mounted. @xref{FTP}.

Another possibility would be to ask your local dealer. :-)



