@node Workbench
@section The Graphical User Interface
@cindex GUI
@cindex Workbench
Die standardm‰ﬂig mitgelieferte Oberfl‰che "Workbench" ist nur die
Grundlage zum Aufbau einer guten, angenehmen Oberfl‰che.

Zu diesem Zweck gibt es zahlreiche Tools, die den Anwendern das
Leben erleichtern.
Einige von diesem findet man auf dem Aminet in den Verzeichnissen
@file{util/#?/}.

@menu
* MUI:: What is MUI?
* Icons:: The standard Icons are so ugly, what do I do?
@end menu

@node MUI
@section What is MUI?
@cindex MUI
@cindex GadTools
MUI is a set of shared libraries which are used to build a comfortable
GUI (@code{Graphical user interface}). The general idea of MUI is that
the programmer determines only the logical structure of the GUI and the
look (Font, Size, Windows on Workbench, Public Screen, own Screen, ...)
is determined by the user only. From the programmers point of view
using MUI is simpler than @code{gadtools.library} but much more
powerful. On the other hand MUI interfaces are slower than
GadTools-Interfaces, especially on old 68000 machines.

MUI is found in two archives, one for developers only and one for
users. Source: Aminet, @file{dev/misc}.

@node Icons
@subsection Icon collections and Backgrounds
@cindex Icons
@cindex MWB
@cindex MagicWB
@cindex NewIcons
The standard icons aren't beautiful, indeed.
But there do exist some beautiful icon collections.
I know of @code{MagicWB} and @code{NewIcons}.

@code{MagicWB} is Shareware. The icons are drawn beautiful in pastel
with every known trick. You also get a lot of good backgrounds which
beautify workbench windows and MUI programs.
Fine and good readable fonts replace the clumsy topaz8 font.
You also get good icons for the ToolManager.
You can find a test version of MagicWB on Aminet.

@code{NewIcons} is Freeware. The icons do have relative intensive colors
and are drawn as three dimensional objects floating slanted in space.
You can find NewIcons on Aminet, @file{util/wb/NewIcons.lha}.

@table @strong
@item F:
How do I turn off the "Gag" of MagicWorkbench
(the intro which appears sometimes during booting)?
@item A:
In S: should be a file called @file{mti.data}. Delete it.

@item F:
How can I create NewIcons?
@item A:
The author of NewIcon currently works on an IconEd. Until then,
Iconian 2.9x (I3) is the only way to create NewIcons.

@item F:
How can I prevent MagicWorkbench Icons to appear in incorrect colors?
@item A:
Register MagicWB 2.0, it contains a tool which patches the palette,
or get one of the different tools from Aminet.
@item MagicColors
@item ShoveColors
Its a good program, you can find it in Iconian, PictIcon or @file{Aminet:util/wb/}).
@end table


