@node Sources
@chapter Where and how do I get software and other informations?
Three questions arise in this context: Which programs can be found, where
are they and how to get them and transfer them home?

@menu
Which programs can be found?
* Infos:: Files and databases on freely distributable software
* Reviews:: A collection of tests.

Where do I get them?
* FTP:: Getting files from a FTP-server
* Mail:: Getting files from a mail-server
* Mailbox:: Getting files from a BBS
* Fish:: The Fish disks

How to transfer them home?
* MS-Dos disks:: Reading and writing MS-Dos disks
* Splitting:: How do I split files?

Other informations
* Mailing lists:: Discussing things
* FAQs:: Other FAQ's
@end menu
@c * Macintosh disks:: Reading Apple Macintosh disks


@node Infos
@section Files and databases on freely distributable software
@cindex KingFisher
@cindex FishXref
@cindex FishCon
@cindex AmigaSciSchool
Of course you need to know where you find things. Many good choices are
listed in this paper, as I hope. Other sources are:

@table @strong
@item AmigaSciSchool
is a list of software and where you find it in Ascii format. It is posted
monthly to the newsgroups @code{comp.sys.amiga.applications},
@code{comp.unix.amiga}, and @code{news.answers}. Additionally you will find
it on Aminet sites (@file{text/doc/AmigaSciSchool-4.01}). It handles
everything listed here and many more, for example GNU software, libraries
(linked and shared), shells, Unix commands, educational and scientific
software and much more.
@item FishCon
are lists of the Fish disk contents. (@file{fish/doc/fishcon-???.lzh} on
Aminet)
@item FishXref
is a cross reference list of the Fish contents.
(@file{fish/doc/fishxref-???.lzh} on Aminet) FishXref and Fishcon are in
Ascii format.
@item KingFisher
A Fish disk database, (@file{fish/doc/Kingfisher1_30.lha}, which is the
program and @file{fish/doc/KFData850.lha} ,which contains the data, on Aminet
or Fish disk 863) allows search by name and context. @xref{Fish}.
@end table


@node Reviews
@section A collection of tests
@cindex Reviews
@cindex comp.sys.amiga.reviews
@code{Comp.sys.amiga.reviews} is a moderated newsgroup where tests of soft- and
hardware, books and anything else relevant to the Amiga are posted. Its always
a good idea to check this newsgroup for a review, if you are interested in
something special. Of course you always find only the latest reviews, but
the older postings are available per FTP from @code{math.uh.edu}, Directory
@file{/pub/Amiga/comp.sys.amiga.reviews} or on the Fish CDs.


@node FTP
@section Getting files from a FTP server
@cindex FTP servers
@cindex Anonymous
@cindex .netrc
@cindex Aminet
Things are easy for those who have access to the Internet and a program
called FTP (File Transfer Program). Nearly all Unix computers have it, but
not all of them allow the use of FTP.

FTP allows you to gain access to some other machines and store and/or
retrieve files. Normally one needs an acoount on the remote machine to use
it, bat a number of machines have a setup that allows everybody to log in
as the user @code{ftp} or @code{anonymous}, so anybody may get files from
them. The most important of this servers are the Aminet servers, which
mirror each other and hence should have the same files. They are the best
choice if you are looking for Amiga software. Aminet hosts are
@example
Land         Name                     IP Adresse      Pfad         Files

USA (MO)     ftp.wustl.edu            128.252.135.4   pub/aminet/    ALL
USA (CA)     ftp.cdrom.com            192.216.222.5   pub/aminet/   9000
USA (TX)     ftp.etsu.edu             192.43.199.20   pub/aminet/   5000
USA (WI)     ftp.netnet.net           198.70.64.3     pub/aminet/  10000
Scandinavia  ftp.luth.se              130.240.18.2    pub/aminet/  10000
Switzerland  ftp.eunet.ch             146.228.10.16   pub/aminet/   5500
Switzerland  ftp.math.ethz.ch         129.132.104.6   pub/aminet/   1000
Switzerland  litamiga.epfl.ch         128.178.151.32  pub/aminet/    300
Germany      kelly.uni-paderborn.de   131.234.128.206 pub/aminet/    ALL
Germany      ftp.uni-paderborn.de     131.234.2.42    pub/aminet/    ALL
Germany      ftp.uni-stuttgart.de     129.69.18.15    aminet/       4500
Germany      ftp.uni-erlangen.de      131.188.3.2     pub/aminet/   7000
Germany      ftp.cs.tu-berlin.de      130.149.17.7    pub/aminet/   4000
Germany      ftp.tu-chemnitz.de       192.108.33.193  pub/aminet/   4000
Germany      ftp.fh-augsburg.de       141.82.16.242   pub/aminet/
Germany      ftp.uni-bremen.de        134.102.228.2   pub/aminet/
Germany      ftp.uni-oldenburg.de     134.106.40.9    pub/aminet/   2500
Germany      ftp.uni-kl.de            131.246.9.95    pub/aminet/   1500
Germany      ftp.uni-trier.de         136.199.8.81    pub/aminet/
Germany      ftp.uni-siegen.de        141.99.128.1    pub/aminet/   1500
Germany      ftp.informatik.rwth-aachen.de 137.226.225.3  pub/aminet/
Germany      ftp.stud.fh-heilbronn.de 141.7.1.41      pub/aminet/    600
Germany      ftp.rz.uni-wuerzburg.de  132.187.1.2     pub/aminet/    700
France       ftp.cnam.fr              163.173.128.15  pub/aminet/
Portugal     ftp.ci.ua.pt             193.136.80.6    pub/aminet/
UK           ftp.doc.ic.ac.uk         155.198.1.40    pub/aminet/    ALL
UK           micros.hensa.ac.uk       148.88.8.84     pub/aminet/   8500
@end example
All these mirrors have a directory @file{/pub/aminet}, where you will find
much stuff. Please use a mirror close to you! Some other important hosts
are
@example
ftp.funet.fi             (Finland)
ftp.isca.uiowa.edu       (USA)
ftp.hawaii.edu           (USA)
ftp.cso.uiuc.edu         (USA)
ftp.dfv.rwth-aachen.de   (Germany)
@end example
Note that grind, aachen and erlangen have the full collection of Fish
disks available! @xref{Fish disk xxx}.
If you don't find a specific file on your local mirror, try
@code{ftp.wustl.edu}, @code{ftp.uni-paderborn.de} or @code{ftp.doc.ic.ac.uk};
they keep all files.

To connect to a special host (ftp.uni-erlangen.de for example), you should
type
@example
ftp ftp.uni-erlangen.de
@end example
@noindent
The host answers by requesting your login. You should type
@example
ftp
@end example
@noindent
No you are asked for a password. Please type your Email address here, if
you have one. If not, use the password ftp.

Now you're inside the host. There is a number of commands you may execute
here. The most important are:
@table @strong
@item ?
Prints the help text of the FTP command. Additionally you may type
@strong{? command} to get information on a special command.
@item bin
Tells the FTP program that you whish to transfer binary files. It is always
a good choice to type bin as the very first command! Files you load without
the bin command can be corrupt.
@item get <file>
Loads the given file from the host. On most Unix machines you
can type something like @samp{get file.txt -} or @samp{get file.txt |more}
to show a text on the screen. Note that there @strong{must not} be any blank
between the | and the word more!
@item mget <pat>
Loads the given files. pat may contain Unix style like wildcards.
@item put <file>
@itemx mput <pat>
Like get and mget, but transfer files from you to the remote host. This
is in most cases not allowed, except for a special directory called
@file{incoming}. You can place files here which you want to make public.
@item cd <dir>
Like the usual cd command. The commands get, mget, put, mput, dir and ls
refer to the current working directory.
@item dir [<dir>]
@item ls [<dir>]
Like @samp{list} and @samp{dir} on the Amiga. Note that the FTP-dir
corresponds to the Amiga-list!
@item bye
Leaves the FTP program.
@end table

When you have used FTP for the first times you will notice, that you always
begin with executing the same steps:
@enumerate
@item Type the login (ftp in most cases)
@item Type the password (your mail address in most cases)
@item Enter the bin command
@item Change the current working directory (@file{/pub/aminet} for example)
@end enumerate
This may get executed automatically. What you need is a file called
@file{.netrc} in your home directory. Note that it needs to be protected
against others! The FTP program doesn't use it, if it can be read by
anything else than you. (Protection is set using the command
@samp{chmod go-rwx .netrc}.) The .netrc file contains some entries for
your most favourite FTP sites, each separated by empy lines. A typicel
entry may look like this:
@example
machine ftp.uni-erlangen.de
login ftp
password <your mail address> or <ftp>
macdef init
    bin
    cd pub/aminet
@end example
Note that on some machines it is possible to use the machine name
@samp{default} which meets all machines not listed in .netrc.


@node Mail
@section Getting files from a Mail server
@cindex Mail-server
Another way to get files is to use a mail server. This assumes that you can
send mail to Internet addresses and get mail from Internet hosts. It works
by sending a mail to the server specifying some commands, for example
send commands for the files you want. Important mail servers are
@example
ftpmail@@decwrl.dec.com
mailserver@@nic.funet.fi
mailserver@@leo.org
mrcserv@@janus.mtroyal.ab.ca
mail-server@@ftp.cs.tu-berlin.de
mail-server@@rtfm.mit.edu
ftp-mail@@uni-paderborn.de
@end example
@noindent
The most important commands are:
@table @strong
@item Help
Tells the server that you wish to get an Ascii file containing detailed
explanation how to use the server.
@item Limit <number>
Specifys that you wish to get not more than <number> Kbytes per mail.
Larger files get splitted into small pieces of at most <number> Kbytes which
are sent as separate mails each. Note that the mails may get larger because
of overhead.
@item Cwd <dir>
Sets the current working directory to <dir>. This directory is used by the
commands send and dir.
@item Index
will return a list of files and/or directories that the server offers. Note
that this may be @strong{very} large!
@item Index <item>
returns a list of files containing <item> in their names.
@item Dir [<dir>]
returns a list of the files and directories in the given directory.
@item Send <file1> <file2> @dots{} <fileN>
Tells the server to send the given files to you.
@item Begin
Tells the server to ignore all lines above this command.
@item End
Like Begin, but specifies to ignore the lines below. (A signature for
example!)
@end table
A typical session would be to send the following mail to the mail server:
@example
BEGIN
CD /pub/aminet/util/arc
SEND LhA_e138.run
END
@end example


@node Mailbox
@section Getting files from a mailbox
@cindex BBS
@cindex mailbox
You also can get files from one of the many BBS's (@code{Bulletin Board System}).
Most of these are driven by private users, so there is nearly everywhere
a mailbox which doesn't cause a too expensive telephone bill.

I want to publish a list of all Amiga mailboxes here.
So please send to me a list of all mailboxes which are related to the Amiga - in any way.
I need all telephone numbers of the boxes and their name.
Tell me the nation where the box resides and - if possible - some more info
(Does the box have Aminet or the Fish PD or FRAS?
Is the box especially for Amiga users?)

Thanks, Ignaz Kellerer

For a list of mailboxes in Germany or Austria or Switzerland, look at the
German version of the AmigaFAQ.


@node Fish
@section The Fish PD series
@cindex Fish PD
A very good source is the Fish PD series. One distinguishes between the floppy
disks and the CD-Roms.

@menu
* Fish floppy disks:: The Amiga Library disks
* Fish CD:: The Fresh Fish CD-Rom.
@end menu


@node Fish floppy disks
@subsection The Amiga Library disks
@cindex Fish floppy disks
@cindex Amiga Library disks
Fred Fish has started in the middle eighties to collect freely distributable
software on floppy disks. There are 1000 disks and very much
good stuff on it.
Most Amiga dealers sell them and most magazines contain
addresses of people mailing them to you for about 3$ per disk or less.
Fred Fish has terminated offering software on floppy disks.
Instead, there is a dealer who offers the new software from the CD-Roms
on floppy disks.

There are some things which can be found on the Fish disks, but not on Aminet.
However, you can get them with FTP. @xref{Fish disk xxx}.


@node Fish CD
@subsection The Fresh Fish CD-Roms
@cindex Fish CD-Rom
@cindex Fresh Fish CD-Rom
Fred Fish is going on to offer freely distributable software. But now he
collects it on CD-Rom's. He releases two different kinds of CD's:
@enumerate
@item Monthly released disks are divided into roughly three sections:
@enumerate
@item New material, which includes the material from the new unreleased floppy
disks as well as material which does not appear in the floppy distribution,
about 84Mb on the first disk.
@item Useful utilities that can be used directly off the CD-ROM if desired,
thus freeing up the corresponding amount of hard disk space (GNU Emacs,
Gnu C, GNU C++, Amiga E, PasTeX, AmigaGuide, Installer, 2.0 and
3.0-Includes, different archivers, tape drivers, the AmiCDROM filesystem
and many other GNU and BSD tools, @dots{}), about 150Mb on the first disk.
@item Older material from previous released floppy disks or CD-ROM's, about
404 Mb on the first disk. (Fish disk 600-910)
@end enumerate
@item Disks containing the latest software as well as recent software in
packed format only. (These are intended to be used for example in BBS's.)
@end enumerate
I recommend especially the first kind of Fish CD's. They cost about 20$ plus
3$ for shipping (5$ outside USA/Canada/Mexico) and are available from

@example
Amiga Library Services
610 N. Alma School Road, Suite 18
Chandler, AZ 85224-3687
U.S.A.

Phone/FAX: (602) 917-0917
@end example


@node MS-Dos disks
@section How do I Read and write MS-Dos disks?
@cindex MS-Dos disks
@cindex CrossDos
@cindex Msh
No problem for owners of Workbench 2.1 or higher: The program CrossDos is
part of the Workbench. All you have to do is mounting the device @file{pc0:}
by putting it into the drawer @file{Devs:DOSDrivers} or by double-clicking
the icon in @file{Sys:Storage/DOSDrivers}. Ms-Dos disks in drive @file{df0:}
can now be handled in the usual manner replacing the word @file{df0:} by
@file{pc0:}. For example the directory can be shown with the command
@t{dir pc0:}.

People still running Workbench 2.0 or lower need a program called @code{MSH}.
You will find this on the Aminet (directory misc/emu) and on Fish disk 382.
@xref{Sources}. After editing the file @file{devs:MountList} as described in
the documentation you have to say @t{Mount msh:} in the CLI and can now do
the same as above replacing the word @file{pc0:} with @file{msh:}.

@c
@c @node Macintosh disks
@c @section How can I read Apple Macintosh disks?
@c @cindex Macintosh Disks
@c @cindex Apple Macintosh Disks
@c 800 KB Mac disks cannot be read on the Amiga without special hardware.
@c This is because they are written with variable rotation to put additional
@c blocks onto the outer tracks. Amiga drives cannot do that.
@c
@c 1.44 MB Mac disks are basically 1.44 MB MSDOS disks and can be read on
@c Amigas with real @footnote{Real HD drive means one of the 150 RPM variety C=
@c uses, not one of the early attempts with their own driver and heavy kludgery.}
@c HD drives using CrossDos from Workbench 2.1 or higher.
@c @xref{MS-Dos disks}.
@c
@c Arno Eigenwillig (arno@@yaps.dinoco.de)
@c

@node Splitting
@section How do I split large files?
@cindex Splitting files
There are some archives which are too large to fit on one disk. To transfer
them on disks you need to split them into smaller pieces and transfer each
part on a separate disk. I recommend Martin Schlodder's @code{Splitter}.
(Aminet, @file{util/misc/splitter_121.lha}. The archive contains binaries
for MS-DOS and should be compilable without problems on any Unix system.


@node Mailing lists
@section Discussing things
@cindex Mailing lists
A mailing list is a server that allows to discuss special things via
Email. The server holds a list of people that are interested in the
respective topic. For example, the gcc mailing list will discuss bugs,
new features and other problems of gcc. (@pxref{Compilers}) If a mail is
sent to the server from someone he will forward this mail to all the
other people on the list.

You will be added to the list by sending a mail to the server which will
usually contain the word @samp{Subscribe} or something similar. Once you
are no more interested in the mailing list you can unsubscribe.

Unforunately the servers have a different syntax of subscribing and
unsubscribing. The best way to find how to subscribe is to send a mail
with the word @samp{Help} to the server. He will reply a mail which
should explain how to handle this special server.

Some mailing lists are:
@example
Topic           Server

Amok            listserv@@amokle.stgt.sub.org
Dice            dice-request@@castrov.cuc.ab.ca         or
                dice-request@@hactar.hanse.de (Germany)
gcc             listserv@@lists.funet.fi
Lisp            amigalisp@@contessa.phone.net
Mui             mui-request@@taloa.unice.fr
Oberon-A        oberon-a-request@@wossname.apana.org.au
@end example


@node FAQs
@section Other FAQ's
@cindex FAQ's, others
@cindex AmiBooksFAQ
@cindex AmiTCP/IP FAQ
@cindex Amiga networking FAQ
@cindex Point manager FAQ
This is not the only FAQ, of course. Lots of FAQ's are available
either by being posted to newsgroups or by access via FTP.

@table @strong
@item German Amiga-FAQ
This is the german translation of the AmigaFAQ you are reading.
Newsgroups: de.comp.sys.amiga.misc, zer.z-netz.rechner.amiga.allgemein
HTML:  @file{http://www.leo.org/archiv/amiga/misc/amigafaq/}
Aminet: @file{docs/misc/AmigaFAQg.lha}
Maintainer: Ignaz Kellerer, kellerer@@informatik.tu-muenchen.de
@item Amiga related books FAQ
This is a list of books for the Amiga, including short discussions,
prices and sources. Newsgroups: comp.sys.amiga.misc,
comp.sys.amiga.introduction, comp.sys.amiga.programmer (monthly)
HTML: @file{http://eksl-www.cs.umass.edu/~atkin/amiga/books.faq.html}
Ftp: rtfm.mit.edu, @file{pub/usenet/comp.sys.amiga.misc}.
Maintainer: Marc Atkin, atkin@@cs.umass.edu
@item AmiTCP/IP FAQ
This is for users of AmiTCP/IP, a set of programs which allows to
include an Amiga into a TCP/IP network. (Most well known nets,
Internet for example use TCP/IP.)
Newsgroups: comp.sys.amiga.misc, comp.sys.amiga.datacomm,
comp.sys.amiga.networking (biweekly)
Ftp: rtfm.mit.edu, pub/usenet/comp.sys.amiga.networking
Maintainer: Neil J. McRae (atcpfaq@@domino.demon.co.uk)
@item Amiga Networking FAQ
Unlike the AmiTCP/IP FAQ this one wants to cover all aspects of
networking, including TCP/IP and Envoy.
Newsgroups: comp.sys.amiga.datacomm, comp.sys.amiga.hardware
Ftp: rtfm.mit.edu, pub/usenet/comp.sys.amiga.networking
Maintainer: Richard Norman (norman@@afas.msfc.nasa.gov)
@item Point Manager FAQ
Networking seems to be quite a problem: This FAQ os for Point Manager,
a FidoNet-client (so-called points).
Newsgroups: comp.sys.amiga.datacomm
Ftp: rtfm.mit.edu, pub/usenet/comp.sys.amiga.datacomm
Maintainer: Eric Krieger (pm_faq@@quasar.hacktic.nl)
@item All about FTP
Explains the usage of the file transfer program FTP. @xref{FTP}.
Newsgroups: comp.sys.amiga.misc (monthly)
Ftp: Aminet, info/start
Betreuer: Urban Dominik Mueller (umueller@@amiga.icu.net.ch)
@end table


